good evening from the Bushnell Theatre
in Hartford Connecticut I'm Jim Lehrer
of the NewsHour on PBS welcome to the
first of the 1996 presidential debates
between President Bill Clinton the
Democratic nominee and Senator Bob Dole
the Republican nominee this event is
sponsored by the Commission on
Presidential Debates in the last 90
minutes Halloween a format and rules
worked out by the two campaigns there
will be two-minute opening and closing
statements in between a series of
questions each having three parts a 90
second answer a 60 second rebuttal and a
30 second response I will assist the
candidates in adhering to those time
limits with the help of a series of
lights visible to both under their rules
the candidates are not allowed to
question each other directly I will ask
the questions there are no limitations
on the subjects the order for everything
tonight was determined by coin toss now
to the opening statements and to
President Clinton mr. president thank
you Jim and thank you to the people of
Hartford our hosts I want to begin by
saying again how much I respect senator
Dole and his record of public service
and how hard I will try to make this
campaign and this debate one of ideas
not insults four years ago I ran for
president at a time of high unemployment
and rising frustration I wanted to turn
this country around with a program of
opportunity for all responsibility from
all and an American community where
everybody has a role to play
I wanted a government that was smaller
and less bureaucratic to help people
have the tools to make the most of their
own lives four years ago you took me on
faith now there's a record ten and a
half million more jobs rising incomes
falling crime rates and welfare rolls a
strong America piece we better off then
what years ago doing
we cut the deficit by 60% now let's
balance the budget and protect Medicare
Medicaid education in the environment we
cut taxes for 15 million working
Americans now let's pass the tax cuts
for education and child-rearing help
with medical emergencies and buying a
home we pass Family and Medical Leave
now let's expand it so more people can
succeed as parents and in the workforce
we passed a hundred thousand police the
assault weapons brand the Brady Bill now
let's keep going by finishing the work
of putting the police on the street and
tackling juvenile gangs we passed
welfare reform now let's move a million
people from welfare to work and most
important let's make education our
highest priority so that every
eight-year-old will be able to read
every twelve-year-old can log on to the
internet every eighteen-year-old can go
to college we can build that bridge to
the 21st century and I look forward to
discussing exactly how we're going to do
it senator Dole to win us thank you
Thank You mr. president for those kind
words thank the people of Hartford
Commission and all those out who may be
listening or watching it's a great honor
for me to be here standing here as the
Republican nominee I'm very proud to be
the Republican nominee reaching out to
Democrats and independents I have three
very special people within my wife
Elizabeth my daughter Robin who's never
let me down and I fellow named Frank
Kaurava from New York
along with Ollie Manon and helped me out
in the mountains of Italy a few years
back I've learned from them that people
do have tough times and sometimes you
can't go it alone and that's what
America is all about
I remember getting my future back from
doctors and nurses and a doctor in
Chicago named doctor collision and ever
since that time I tried to give
something back to my country to the
people who are
watching us tonight America is the
greatest place in the face of the earth
I know millions of you still have
anxieties you work harder and harder to
make ends meet and put food on the table
you worry about the quality and the
safety of your children the quality of
education but even more importantly you
worry about the future and will they
have the same opportunities that you and
I have had and Jack Kemp and I want to
share with you some ideas tonight Jack
Kemp is my running mate doing an
outstanding job now I'm a plain speaking
man and I learned long ago that your
word was your bond and I promise you
tonight that I'll try to address your
concerns and not try to exploit them
it's a tall order but I've been running
against the odds for a long time and
again I'm honored to be here this
evening
I suppose the first question there's a
major difference in your view of the
role of the federal government and that
of Senator dole how would you define the
difference
well Jim I believe that the federal
government should give people the tools
and try to establish the conditions in
which they can make the most of their
own lives that to me is the key and that
leads me to some different conclusions
from Senator Dole for example we have
reduced the size of the federal
government to its smallest size in 30
years we produce more regulations
eliminating more programs than my two
Republican predecessors but I have
worked hard for things like
the Family and Medical Leave law the
Brady Bill the assault weapons ban the
program to put a hundred thousand police
on the street all these are programs
that Senator Dole opposed that I
supported because I felt they were
illegitimate to help people make the
most of their own lives I've worked hard
to help families impart values to their
own children I supported the beat ship
so that parents would be able to control
what their kids watch on television when
their young along with the rating
systems Intel it for television and
educational television I supported a
strong action against the tobacco
companies to stop the marketing
advertising and sale of tobacco to young
people I supported a big increase in the
safe and drug-free schools program these
were areas on which Senator Dole and I
differed but I believed that they were
the right areas for America to be acting
together as one country to help
individuals and families make the most
of their own lives and raise their kids
with good values and a good future
sailor Dole one minute I think the basic
differences and I had some experience in
this I think the basic difference I
trust the people the president trusts
the government we go back and looked at
the health care plan that he wanted to
impose on the American people 1/7 of
total economy 17 new taxes price
controls 35 to 50 new bureaucracies at
Cost 1.5 trillion dollars don't forget
that that happened in 1993 a tax
increase the tax everybody in America
not just the rich
if you made 25,000 this original poster
you got your social security taxes
increased we had a BTU tax burn induced
35 billion dollar gas tax a two hundred
and sixty five billion dollar tax
increase I guess I relied more on the
individual I carry a little card around
in my pocket called the Tenth Amendment
where possible I want to give power back
to the states and back to the people
that's my difference for the president
alive specific differences later he
noted a few but there are others
president thirty seconds I trust the
people we've done a lot to give the
people more powers to make their own
decisions over their own lives but I do
think we are right when we try to for
example give mothers and newborns 48
hours before they can be kicked out of
the hospital ending these drive-by
deliveries I think we were right to pass
the cassabaum kennedy bill which says
you can't lose your health insurance
just because you change the odds and
because someone and your family's been
sick our government is smaller and less
bureaucratic and has given more
authority to the states than its two
predecessors under Republican presidents
but I do believe we have to help our
people get ready to succeed in the 21st
century senator Dole the president said
in his opening statement we are better
off today than we were four years ago do
you agree well he's better off than he
was four years ago
[Music]
that's right
and I may be better off four years from
now but
I don't know I looked at the slowest
growth in the century he inherited a
growth of 4.7 4.8% hots down about 2.4
percent we're gonna pass a million
bankruptcies this year for the first
time in history we've got stagnant wages
in fact women's wages have dropped 2.2
percent
men's wages haven't gone up gone down so
we have stagnation we have the highest
foreign debt in history and it seems to
me that if you take a look are you
better off well I guess some may be
better off Saddam Hussein is probably
better off than he was four years ago
Rene Preval is probably better off than
he was four years ago but are the
American people they're working harder
and higher and harder and paying more
taxes for the first time in history you
pay about 40% of what you earn more than
you spend for food clothing and shelter
combined for taxes under this
administration so some may be better off
they talked about family income being up
that's not true in Connecticut family
income is down and it's up in some cases
because both parents are working one
works for the family and one works to
pay taxes for the government we're gonna
give them a tax cuts and they spend more
time with their children maybe even take
a vacation that's what America is all
about the truth
well let me say first of all in February
senator Dole acknowledged that the
American economy was in the best shape
that's been in in 30 years we have ten
and a half million more jobs a faster
job growth rate than under any
Republican administration since the
1920s wages are going up for the first
time in a decade we have record numbers
of new small businesses we had the
biggest drop in the number of people in
poverty in 27 years all groups of people
are growing we had the biggest drop in
income inequality in 27 years in 1995
the average family's income has gone up
over $1,600
just since our economic plan passed so I
think it's clear that we're better off
than we were four years ago
now we need to focus on what do we need
to do to be better off still how can we
help people as we are to get their
retirements when they work for small
businesses to be able to afford health
insurance be able to educate their
children that's what I want to focus on
but we're clearly better off than we
were four years ago senator Dole
acknowledged this year said oh I doubt
that I acknowledge that this year but in
any event I think we just look at the
facts we ask the people who are viewing
tonight are you better off than you were
four years ago it's not whether we're
better off is whether they're better off
are you working harder to put food on
the table
feed your children are your children
getting better education drug use has
doubled the past 44 months all across
America
crime has gone down but it's because the
mayor's like Rudy Giuliani where one
third of the drop happened in one city
New York City so yes some may be better
off
but are the people listening tonight the
working families to a benefit for
economic package they'll be better off
Bob Dole was president and Jack Kemp is
vice president mr. president senator
level has come pretty close in the last
few days accusing you of
about his physician or Medicare reform
have you done so absolutely not remember
that in this campaign season since
Senator Dole Senate candidate he is
bragged about the fact that he voted
against Medicare in the beginning in
1965 one of only 12 members he said he
did the right thing then he knew it
wouldn't work at the time that's what he
said
then his budget that he passed along
with speaker Gingrich cut Medicare two
hundred and seventy billion dollars more
than was necessary to repair the
Medicare trust fund it would have
charged seniors more for out-of-pocket
costs as well as more in premiums
because doctors could have charged them
more the American Medical Hospital
Association the nurses Association the
Catholic Hospital Association all said
hundreds of hospitals could closed and
people would be hurt badly under the
dole Gingrich Medicare plan that I
vetoed and now with this risky 150
billion dollar tax scheme of Senator
doles you know even his own friends his
campaign co-chair senator d'amato says
that they can't possibly pay for it
without cutting Medicare more and
cutting Social Security as well
according to him now my balanced budget
plan adds ten years to the life of the
Medicare trust fund ten years and we'll
have time to deal with the long-term
problems of the baby boomers but it was
simply wrong to finance their last
scheme to cut Medicare two hundred and
seventy billion dollars to run the risk
of it withering on the vine we always
have to reform it over the years but we
need someone who believes in it to
reform it said oh well I must say I look
back at the vote on Medicare 1965 we had
a program called elder care that also
provided drugs on his means tests of
people who needed medical attention
received and I thought it was a good
program but I've supported Medicare ever
since in fact I used to go and my mother
would tell me said Bob all I've gots my
Social Security in my Medicare don't cut
it I wouldn't violate anything my mother
said in fact we had
rotation about our mothers one day a
very poignant conversation in the White
House I'm concerned about health care
I've had the best health care government
hospitals army hospitals and I know it's
important but we gotta fix it
it's his trustees the president's
trustees doc miners say it's gonna go
broke he doesn't fix it for ten years
we ought to point a commission just as
we did with Social Security in 1983 when
we rescued Social Security and I was
proud to be on that Commission along
with Claude pepper the champion of
senior citizens in Florida and we can do
it again
if we take the politics out of it stop
carried scurrying the seniors mr.
president you've already spent forty
five million dollars scaring seniors and
tearing me apart I think it's time to
have a truce well let me say first of
all I'd be happy to have a commission
deal with this and I appreciate what
senator Dole did on the 83 Social
Security Commission but it won't be
possible to do if his tax scheme passes
because even his own campaign co-chair
senator D'Amato says he'll have to cut
Medicare even more than it was cut in
the bill that I vetoed I vetoed that
bill because it cut more Medicare and
and basically ran the risk of breaking
up the system my balanced budget plan
puts ten years on the Medicare we ought
to do that then we can have a commission
but Senator doles plans are not good for
the country
senator dole speaking of your tax plan
do you still think that's a good idea
the 15% across-the-board tax cut oh yes
and you'll be eligible
so Lucy to double the former president
yes
I need it the people need it that's the
point this is not a Wall Street tax cut
this is a family tax cut this is a Main
Street tax cut fifteen percent across
let's take a family making thirty
thousand dollars a year that's twelve
hundred and sixty one dollars now maybe
some in this bush bushnell memorial not
a lot of money but people watching I had
a couple of kids a working family that's
four or five months of daycare maybe a
personal computer it may be three or
four months of mortgage payments this
economic package is about families but
it's a six-point package first of all
it's a balanced budget amendment
Constitution which President Clinton
defeated he twisted arms and got six
Democrats to go the other way we lost by
one vote it's balancing the budget by
the year 2002 it's the tax cut cutting
capital gains 50% you can go out and
create more jobs and more opportunities
it's a state tax relief it's a $500 per
child tax credit it's about litigation
reform out of the president gets
millions of dollars from the trial
lawyers if I doesn't like this provision
in fact I fell off that podium in Chico
before I let the ground hit the ground
had a call on my cell phone from a trial
lawyer saying I think we got a case so
and it's also regulatory reform it's a
good package mr. president we'd like to
have your support mr. president
well here's the problem with it it
sounds very good but there's a reason
that 500 economists including seven
Nobel Prize winners and business
periodicals like Businessweek and even
Senator doles friends senator Warren
Rudman former Republican senator from
New Hampshire says it's not a practical
program it's a five hundred and fifty
billion dollar tax scheme that will
cause a big hole in the deficit which
will raise interest rates and slow down
the economy and cause people to pay more
for home mortgages car payments credit
card payments college loans and small
business loans it's not good to raise
the deficit we've worked too hard to
lower it it'll actually raise taxes on
nine million people and in addition to
that it will force bigger cuts in
Medicare Medicaid education in the
environment than the ones that he and
mr. Gingrich passed that I vetoed last
year so it sounds great but our targeted
tax cut for education child rearing
health care and home buying which is
paid for in my balanced budget plan
something that he is not done certified
by the Congressional Budget Office
that's the right way to go so though
president wants to increase spending 20
percent over the next year six years I
wanna increase spending fourteen percent
that's how simple it is I want the
government to pinch pennies for a change
instead of the American families we're
talking about six percentage points over
six years and with that money you give
it back to the working people
you also provide opportunity
scholarships to low-income parents will
have the same choice that others had and
sending their children to better schools
and we it will work and what it does
work mr. president on all you've
congratulating mr. president
the senator mentioned trial lawyers and
camping that means campaign financing
how do you personally avoid being unduly
influenced by people who give you money
or give you services than your campaigns
well I try to articulate my positions as
clearly as possible tell people what I
stand for and let them decide whether
they're going to support me or not hey
the senator mentioned the trial lawyers
in the case of the product liability
bill which they passed and I vetoed I
think that's what he's talking about it
I actually wanted to sign that bill and
I told the people exactly what the
Congress exactly what kind of bill I
would sign now a lot of the trial
lawyers didn't want me to sign any bill
at all but I thought we ought to do what
we could to cut frivolous lawsuits but
they wouldn't make some of the changes
that I thought should be made now let me
just give you an example I had a person
in the Oval Office who lost a child in a
school bus accident where a drunk driver
caused the accident directly but there
were problems with the school bus the
drunk driver had no money under the new
bill if I had signed it a person like
that could never have had any recovery I
thought that was wrong so I gave four or
five specific examples to the Congress
and I said prove to me that these people
could recover but we're going to
eliminate frivolous lawsuits I'll sign
the bill but generally I believe that a
president has to be willing to do what
he thinks is right I've done a lot of
things that were controversial my
economic plan my trade position Bosnia
Haiti taking on the NRA for the first
time taking on the tobacco companies for
the first time sometimes you just have
to do that because you know it's right
for the country over the long run that's
what I've tried to do and that's what I
will continue to do as president said oh
yeah how does he avoid conflict well I
don't know in the case of the trial
lawyers when I look at the trial lawyers
I mean you're a few million short you
run out to Hollywood and pick up two to
four million an organized labor comes to
Washington DC and puts 35 million into
the pot now if these aren't special
interests and I've got a lot to learn I
was there for a while before I left on
June the 11th the trial lawyers
and I don't like I don't you know my
wife's a lawyer with the only two
lawyers and Larsen trust each other but
we're lawyers
I like lawyers I don't just like trial
lawyers but it seemed to me there's got
to be some into the frivolous lawsuits
and got to be some cap on punitive
damage you're putting a lot of business
people out of out of business small
businessmen and small business women who
paid 70% of your 19th their two hundred
sixty five billion dollar tax increase
the largest tax increase in history
America I said that one day in patan one
and the Democrats say no he said in the
history of the world so I modified it
the largest tax increase in the history
of the world and it seems to me that
there's a problem there mr. president
and I will address you as mr. president
you didn't do that with mr. with
President Bush in 1992 let me say first
of all I signed a tort reform bill that
dealt with civilian aviation a couple of
years ago I approved that I will sign
reasonable tort reform secondly senator
Dole had some pretty harsh comments
about special interest money but it
wasn't me who opposed what we tried to
do to save the lives of children who are
subject to tobacco and then went to the
tobacco growers and bragged about
standing up for the federal government
and we tried to stop the advertising
marketing and sales of tobacco to
children and it wasn't me that let the
polluters actually come in to the halls
of Congress into the rooms and rewrite
the environmental laws that's what
speaker Gingrich and Senator Dole did
not me that's enough so I believe that
we should take a different approach to
this and talk about how we stand on the
issues instead of trying to characterize
each other's motivations I think Senator
Dole and I just honestly disagree well
senator don't let me ask you the same
question I asked the president how do
you avoid
five people contribute money and
services to your campaign I think it's
very difficult let's be honest about it
that's why we need campaign finance
reform that's why I reach out to the
parole voters and we've done about all
that we are the Reform Party Republican
Party and the parole voters are looking
for Oman to take a look at the
Republican record
whatever it is whatever the check fist
was a 92 is all done but campaign
finance reform I worked with senator
Mitchell who played me I guess in the
debate warm up
we tried six or eight years ago to he
appointed three people I appointed three
people to get campaign finance reform we
couldn't get it done because it wasn't
enforceable you suggested a commission
Newt Gingrich did I've suggest that at
least four or five years ago we have a
commission on campaign finance reform
they sent it to Congress we have to vote
it up or down that's how it works we're
never gonna fix it by the party two
Democrats want a better advantage
themselves we want a better advantage as
Republicans and that's not how it's
gonna work
but I want to touch on this tobacco
thing I know the president's been
puffing a lot on that but I want to go
back to 1965 that was my first vote
against tobacco income news when I said
we ought to label cigarettes and I've
had a consistent record ever since 1965
we passed a bill in 1992 that encouraged
the states to adopt programs to stop
kids flowing in all 50 states did it it
took three and a half years a one-in-ten
election year mr. present you ever
thought about stopping smoking what
about drugs that have increased double
in the last 44 months cocaine's up 141
percent for marijuana cocaine up 166
percent I mean it seems to me that you
have a selective memory and you know
mine doesn't work that way so I just
want to try to correct it as we go along
mr. Larry I hope we'll have a chance to
discuss drugs later in the program but
let me respond to what you have said I
agree that there's too many incumbent
politicians in Washington and both
parties have consistently opposed
campaign finance reform that was
certainly the case from the minute I got
there so after speaker Gingrich and
Senator Dole took over the Congress I
went to New Hampshire and
a man suggested a gentleman that
unfortunately just passed away a couple
of days ago suggested that we appoint a
commission and I shook hands with him on
it and I appointed my members and the
Commission never met and then senator
doles ardent supporter Senator McCain
who's out there today along with Senator
Feingold supporters sponsored a campaign
finance reform proposal I strongly
supported it and members of Senator
doles own party in the Senate killed it
and he was not out there urging them to
vote for the mccain-feingold bill so I
think the American people including the
Perot supporters know that I've had a
consistent record in favor of campaign
finance reform and I will continue to
have and I hope we can finally get it in
the next session of Congress because we
need it badly still don't well on
campaign reform itself we're gonna get
it when we have a bipartisan Commission
take it out of politics get people don't
have any interest in politics but
understand the issue and let them make a
recommendation to Congress no we're not
kidding anybody mr. president these are
sophisticated people watching on
millions and millions of Americans they
know the Republican Party hasn't done if
they know the Democratic Party won't do
it we ought agree that somebody else
should do it then we have to vote it up
or down mr. president senator Ritchie
drugs he's said he's suggested in the
past that you are you bears some
responsibility for the rise and drug use
of teenagers in the United States is he
right well Jim I think every American in
any position of responsibility should be
concerned about what's happening I am
but let's look at the overall record
overall in America cocaine use has
dropped 30 percent in the last four
years casual drug use down 13 percent
the tragedy is that our young people are
still increasing their use of drugs up
to about eleven percent total with
marijuana and I regret it let me tell
you what I've tried to do about I've
pointed a four-star general who led our
efforts south of the border to keep
drugs from coming into the country as
our nation's drugs are the most heavily
directed
soldier in uniform when he retired we
and submitted the biggest drug budget
ever we have dramatically increased
control and enforcement at the border we
supported a crime bill that had 60 death
penalties including the death penalty
for drug kingpins and I supported a big
expansion in safe and drug-free schools
programs to support things like the DARE
program because I thought all those
things were very important I do I think
that I bear some responsibility for the
fact that too many of our children still
don't understand drugs or wrong drugs
can kill you even though I have
consistently opposed the legalization of
drugs all my public life and worked hard
against them I think we all do and I
hope we can do better I don't think this
issue should be politicized because my
record is clear and I don't think
senator Dole supports using drugs I
think we just have to continue to work
on this until those who think it isn't
dangerous and won't kill them and won't
destroy their lives get the message and
change senator well it you know again
you're very selective mr. president you
don't want to politicize a drug but it's
already politicize Medicare go out and
scare senior citizens and other
vulnerable groups veterans and people
who get Pell grants and things of this I
mean you say we've done all these bad
things which isn't isn't the case but it
seems to me the record is clear the
record is pretty clear in Arkansas I'm
your governor drug abuse double that you
resisted appointment of a drug czar
there because you thought it might
interfere with treatment but here you
cut the drug czars office 83% you cut
interdiction substantially I mean that's
what I want to stop it from coming
across the border and in my
administration we're gonna train the
National Guard to stop it from coming
across the border this is a invasion of
drugs from all
of the world and we have a
responsibility if you had a surgeon or
before general McCaffrey you had a lady
who said we ought to consider legalizing
drugs is that the kind of leadership we
need and I won't comment on other things
that have happened in your
administration or your past about drugs
but it seems to me the kids ought to
dabble they started they ought to stop
and just don't do it
mr. president let me say again we did
have a drug czar in Arkansas but he
answered to the governor just like this
one answers to the president that's what
I thought we ought to do secondly
senator Dole you voted against the crime
bill that had the death penalty for drug
kingpins in it and you voted to cut
services to 23 million schoolchildren
under the safe and drug-free schools Act
I don't think that means you're soft on
drugs we just have a different approach
but let me remind you that my family has
suffered from drug abuse I know what
it's like to see somebody you love
nearly lose their lives and I hate drugs
senator we need to do this together and
we can senator Dole on the government
continuing talking about the
government's role if elected president
would you seek to repeal the Brady Bill
and the ban on assault weapons not if I
didn't have a better idea but I've got a
better idea
it's something I've worked on for 15
years it's called the automated check or
the instant check it's being used in 17
states right now states like Florida
Colorado Virginia and other states you
don't buy any gun you don't get any gun
we've got twenty million names on a
computer in Washington DC if people
should not have a gun we ought to keep
guns out of the hands of criminals and
they're eight other categories that
should not have guns I've been working
on this for a
long time you walk in you put your
little card in there if it says tilt you
don't get any gun you don't get a
handgun you don't get a rifle you don't
get a shotgun
you get Zippo if we're going to protect
America children and American families
and people who live as prisoners in
their own home we've got to stop guns
from being dumped on the street
administration says they support the
instant check they Pro created about two
hundred million dollars but only spent
about three million dollars to get it
underway in our administration in my
administration we will expedite this
keeps up with technology it keeps guns
out of the hands of people who should
not have guns that is the bottom line
and I believe it's a good idea as strong
bipartisan support and perhaps that's
another thing we can deep below decide
you talk about the Brady Bill there's
only been one prosecution under the
Brady but only one under the assault
weapon ban and only seven under the
Brady Bill that you talk about all the
time and on the assault weapon bans out
of 17 weapons of a ban only six man now
because Leben have been modified in the
back on the street let's get together on
this instant check because that will
really make a difference mr. president
let me say first of all senator Dole has
gone back and forth about whether he'd
be for repealing the Brady Bill or
repealing the assault weapons ban and I
think his present position is that he
would not do so and if that's true I'm
grateful for it but let's look at the
facts here the Brady Bill has kept at
least 60,000 felons fugitives and
stalkers from getting handguns senator
Dole led the fight against the Brady
Bill he tried to keep it from coming to
my desk he didn't succeed and I signed
it and I'm glad I did then when we had
the assault weapons ban in the Senate
Senator Dole fought it bitterly and
opposed the entire crime bill and almost
brought the entire crime bill down
because the National Rifle Association
didn't want the assault weapons ban just
like they didn't want the Brady Bill but
two years later nobody's lost their
handguns
there I mean their rifles when we've
expanded the brady bill that cover
people who beat up their spouses and
their kids and this is a safer country
so i'm glad i took on that fight and i
believe with all respect i was right and
he was wrong well the president never
quite right i mean it seemed to me at
the time that the assault weapon ban was
not effective that's history I've told
the NRA that's history
you're not gonna worry about it anymore
I'm not gonna worry about it anymore
let's do something better
let's stop you know playing the
political game mister president talking
about this and this you add up all the
states have used the instant check and
how many weapons Abe Kim kept out of the
hands of criminals he but far surpass
the number you mentioned so in my view
if you want to be protected
you ought to vote for Bob Dole and we
get the instant check passed and we'll
keep guns out of the hands of criminals
mr. president senator bill said the
other day that you practiced a photo op
foreign policy that has lessened the
credibility of the United States
throughout the world is he wrong about
that if he that's what he said he's not
right about that look at where we are
today the United States is still the
indispensable nation in the aftermath of
the Cold War and on the brink of the
21st century I have worked to support
our country is the world's strongest
force for peace and freedom prosperity
and security we have done the following
things number one we've managed the
aftermath of the Cold War
supporting a big drop in nuclear weapons
in Russia the removal of Russian troops
from the Baltics the integration of
Central and Eastern European democracies
into a new partnership with NATO and I
might add with a democratic Russia there
are no nuclear missiles pointed at the
children of the United States tonight
and have not been in our administration
for the first time since the dawn of the
nuclear age we have worked hard for
peace and freedom when I took office
Haiti was governed by a dictator that
had defied the United States when I took
office the worst war in Europe was
waging in Bosnia now there's a
democratically elected president in
Haiti peace in Bosnia
just had elections there we made
progress in Northern Ireland in the
Middle East
we've also stood up to the new threats
of terrorism the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction organized
crime and we have worked hard to expand
America's economic presence around the
world with the biggest increase in trade
with the largest number of new trade
agreements in history that's one of the
reasons America's number one in auto
production again so well I have a
different view again I've supported
President on Bosnia and I think we were
told the troops would be out in a year
now I understand it's been extended till
sometime next year but let's start with
Somalia or they dragged Americans
through the streets nor eighteen
Americans were killed one day because it
didn't have never been down for eight
hours the Rangers they didn't have the
weapons they didn't have the tanks they
asked for the tanks they didn't get the
tanks from this administration because
we were a nation-building
it's called mission creep we turn it
over at the United Nations the president
didn't have much to do about it look at
Haiti where we spent about three billion
dollars when we got an alarm call er
about two weeks ago you got to send down
some more people because the president's
found out their death squads and he's on
he's in his own property so we need more
protection for America Bosnia Northern
Ireland there's no ceasefire in Bosnia I
think there's still lots of problems in
Bosnia we agreed to train an arm the
Muslims so they could defend themselves
the policy you haven't you ran in 1992
we haven't done that we're way behind
which means Americans can't come home
American shouldn't have gone there in
the first place had we let let them
defend themselves as they have a right
to do in her article 57 of the United
Nations Charter mr. president first of
all I take full responsibility for what
happened in Somalia but the American
people must remember that those soldiers
were under an American commander when
that happened I believe they did the
best they could under the circumstances
and let's not forget that hundreds of
thousands of lives were saved there
secondly in Haiti political violence is
much much smaller than it was thirdly in
Bosnia it's a virtual miracle that there
been no return to war and at least there
has now been an election and the
institutions are beginning to function
in Northern Ireland in the Middle East
we are better off than we were four
years ago there will always be problems
in this whole world but if we're moving
in the right direction and America is
leading we're better off senator Dole if
elected president what criteria would
you use to decide when to send US troops
into harm's way well it after World War
one we had you know a policy of
disengagement that Memorial of one of
World War two we had sort of compulsory
engagement policy now I think we had to
have a selective engagement policy we
had to determine when our interests are
involved not the United Nations
interests and many of the things the
president talked about he'd turned over
the United Nations they decided he's
deployed more troops than any president
in history around the world it's cost us
billions and billions of dollars for
peacekeeping operations but these are
facts and it seems to me that when you
make a decision the decision is made by
the president of States by the commander
in chief he makes that decision when he
commits young men or young women were
going around and defend our liberty and
our freedom that would be my position
then I'm going to have a top-down review
at the Pentagon not a bottom-up review
of y'all fight over how much money's
there
I want to top-down review to determine
what our priorities are and what we
should do in defense and then follow
that policy instead of this bottom-up
review with all the services fighting
for the money you know the president
said he was gonna cut defense 60 billion
dollars he cut defense a hundred and
twelve billion dollars devastated states
like California and others and I think
now we've got a problem I got to go back
and look it's just like you said in
Texas one day you know you raise taxes
too much and you did and you cut defense
too much mr. president and you did you
may have said that too but the bottom
line is we are the strongest nation in
the world we provide the leadership and
we're gonna have to continue to provide
the leadership but let's do it on our
terms when our interests are involved
and not when somebody blows a whistle
with the United Nations our military is
the strongest military in the world it
is the strongest best prepared best
equip it has ever been there is very
little difference in the budget that I
proposed in the Republican budget over
the next six year period we are spending
a lot of money to modernize our weapon
system I proposed a lot of new
investments to improve the quality of
life for our soldiers for our men and
women in uniform for their families for
their training that is my solemn
obligation you ask when do you decide to
deploy them the interests of the
American people must be at stake our
values must be at stake we have to be
able to make a difference and frankly we
have to consider what the risks are to
our young men and women in uniform but I
believe the evidence is that our
deployments have been successful in
Haiti in Bosnia when we moved to Kuwait
to repel Saddam Hussein's and threatened
invasion of Kuwait when I'd have sent
the fleet into the Taiwan Straits when
we've worked hard to end the North Korea
nuclear threat I believe the United
States is at peace tonight in part
because of the discipline careful
effective deployment of our military
resources well I think I mention North
Korea and Cuba while ago you look at
North Korea where they have enough
plutonium to build six nuclear bombs
where we sort of distance ourself more
allies South Korea they lost about a
million people in the war the Korean War
the Forgotten War we lost 53 thousand
Americans we shouldn't be doing any
favors for North Korea it's a closed
society we don't have any inspection on
the way that's gonna work or not we
could give him these incentive some
would call them something else
incentives we know what's gonna happen
here we have Cuba 90 miles smart Shores
and what are we done we passed the law
that gave people a right to sue and the
president postponed it for six months
and it seemed to me if you want to send
a signal you got to send a signal mr.
president the sooner the better off
we'll be if you put tougher sanctions on
Castro and not try to make it easier for
you mr. president what is your attitude
toward Cuba
how Cuba should be treated well first of
all look for the last four years we have
worked hard to put more and more
pressure on the Castro government to
bring about more openness and move
toward democracy in 1992 before I became
president Congress passed the Cuba
democracy Act and I enforced it
vigorously
we made the embargo tougher but we
increased contacts people-to-people with
the Cubans including direct telephone
service which was largely supported by
the Cuban American community then Cuba
shot down two of our planes and murdered
four people in international airspace
they were completely beyond the pale of
the law and I signed the helms-burton
legislation senator Dole is correct I
did give about six months before the
effective date of the Act four lawsuits
can actually be filed even though
they're effective now and can be legally
binding because I want to change Cuba
and the United States needs help from
other countries nobody in the world
agrees with our policy on Cuba now but
this law can be used as leverage to get
other countries to help us to move Cuba
to democracy every single country in
Latin America Central America and the
Caribbean is a democracy tonight with
Cuba and if we stay firm and strong we
will be able to bring Cuba around as
well that's the point I made we have to
be firm and strong and I hope I hope
that lap and will happen starting next
January and maybe can happen the balance
of this year we have not been firm and
strong you look at the port people are
still live in Cuba it's a haven for drug
smugglers and we don't have a firm
policy when it comes to Fidel Castro in
my view the policy has failed so
Congress passes the law the president
signs it like he does a lot of things
but he like welfare reform well I'm
gonna sign it but I'm gonna try to
change it next year I mean a lot of
these election year conversions the
president talked about all the drug
money
all the other things all this
anti-smoking campaign all happened in
1996 I think the people viewing out too
ought to go back and take a look at the
record when he when he fought a balanced
budget amendment when he gave it that
biggest tax increase in history when
they tried to take over your health care
system when he fought regulatory reform
that cost the average family six to
seven thousand dollars a year this is
serious a business about your family
it's about your business and in this
case it's about a firmer policy with
Cuba there were several off the subject
whoppers in that litany yeah let me just
mention the senator Dole voted for 900
billion dollars in tax increases his
running mate Jack Kemp once said that
Bob Dole never met a tax
he didn't hike and everybody knows
including the Wall Street Journal hardly
a friend of the Democratic Party of this
administration that the 82 tax increase
he sponsored in inflation-adjusted
dollars was the biggest tax increase in
American history so well at least get
the facts out here on the table so we
can know where to go from here so did
all you mentioned health health reform
several times what do you think should
be done about the health care system
let me first answer that question about
the 1982 tax cut you know we were
closing loopholes we're going after big
corporations I know you probably would
oppose a mr. president but I think we
should have a fairer system and a
flatter system and we'll have a fair
fighter system and we're gonna make the
economic package work health care well
we finally passed the Kassebaum bill the
president was opposed to it in 1993 you
want to give us this big system it took
over about one-seventh the economy that
put on price controls created all these
state alliances would cost 1.5 trillion
dollars and forced people into managed
care well they wanted or not most people
want to see their own doctor they're
gonna see their own doctor when Bob Dole
as president we won't threaten anybody
so he passed the kennedy Kassebaum gas
bomb kennedy bill that would cover about
20 to 25 million people we've been for
that
for five or six years the president held
it up and even had finally got near
passage
senator Kennedy held it up 408 because
he wasn't satisfied with one provision
but a will cover pre-existing condition
if you change your job you're going to
be covered so a lot of good things in
this bill that we should have done
instead of trying this massive massive
takeover by the federal government but
then of course they had a Democratic
Congress and they didn't want to do that
so we got a Republican Congress we
finally got action and I'm very proud of
my colleagues in the Republican Party
for getting that done it means a lot to
a lot of people watching us tonight
well that sounds is very good but it's
very wrong senator Dole remembers well
that we actually offered not to even put
in a health care bill in 1994 in 93 but
instead to work with the Senate
Republicans and write a joint bill and
they said no because they got a memo
political advisor instead characterized
whatever we did is nothing was health
care before the nothing they could make
that maybe we bit up you can chew but
we're pursuing a step for now the Kenan
on the bill that I signed will make it
possible for 25 million people to keep
their health insurance when they change
jobs or somebody in their family's been
sick I signed a bill to stop these
drive-by deliveries where insurance
companies can force people out of the
hospital after 24 hours and I vetoed
senator doles Medicare plan that would
have forced a lot of seniors in the
managed care and taken a lot more money
out of their pockets and led to Medicare
withering on the vine
well many of the provisions in the Casa
Bob bill were provisions of my
provisions like deductions for long term
care making certain it self-employed
people are watching tonight to deduct
not 30% but 80% of you pay for premiums
you can also deduct long-term care now
so it's a good it's a good start I think
there's a no we're even looking at our
tax cut proposal or economic package it
may be a way there to reach out to the
uninsured because a lot of uninsured
people in this country particularly
children that should be covered another
way you can do is to expand Medicaid in
America no one will go without health
care no one will go without food or at
the finish your said sorry food
back to Foreign Affairs for a moment mr.
president are you satisfied with the way
you handled this last Iraq crisis and
the end result well I believe that we
did the appropriate thing under the
circumstances Saddam Hussein is under a
UN resolution not to threaten his
neighbors or threaten his own repress
his own citizens unfortunately a lot of
people have never been as concerned
about the Kurds as the United States has
tried to be and we've been flying an
operation to protect them out of Turkey
for many years now what happened was of
one of the turkeys and one of the
Kurdish leaders invited him to go up
north but we felt since the whole world
community had told him not we had to do
something we did not feel that I could
certainly didn't feel I should troops
I'm out of where he had gone and that
was the only way to do that so the
appropriate thing strategically to do
was to reduce his ability to threaten
his neighbors we did that by expanding
what's called the no-fly zone by
increasing our allies control of the air
so now water was a bet dad was it the
right thing to do I believe it was is it
fully effective did it make him withdraw
from the north well he does he has a
little bit and I hope he will continue
we have learned that if you give him an
inch she'll take a mile we had to do
something and even though not all of our
allies supported it at first I think
most of them now believe that what we
did was an appropriate thing to do well
the president's own CIA director says
that Saddam is stronger now than he was
and I don't understand extending the
no-fly zone in the south and the trouble
was in the north and what we've done
during the Bush administration the Kurds
were at the State Department negotiating
trying to work their differences out now
we've got all thousands and thousand
refugees we've been shipping I guess
3,000 Kurds to Guam it involves Turkey
and it's a real problem in Saddam is
probably stronger than he ever was
we shot what 44 cruise missiles are
worth about a million to a piece and hit
some radar that repaired in a couple
three days if we inflict any damage No
do we have any of our allies helping
well we have Great Britain they're
always very loyal to us and I appreciate
that
and of course Kuwait even though they
had to find out they're at 5,000 troops
home they didn't even understand that we
had to get their permission the bottom
line is we went in there alone
we're supposed to be operating under UN
resolution we did it without any of our
allies that helped us in the Gulf the
senator dole is - three times before
tonight criticized me for working with
the UN now I'm being criticized for not
working with the UN it's not the you
sometimes the United States has to act
alone or at least has to act first
sometimes we cannot let other countries
have a veto on our foreign policy I
could not send soldiers into the north
of Iraq that would have been wrong
I could reduce Saddam Hussein's ability
and threaten Kuwait and these other
neighbors again that's what I did I
still believe it was the right thing to
do standard all on your photo-op foreign
policy charge against it are mine oh no
no I mean you're a charge against the
president that he top he has a photo-op
hornball does the Middle East summit
last week fall into that category
well there were some good pictures but
does it fall in that County I don't know
I want to be very serious I've supported
the president I thought he was right on
Bosnia I supported him on that too and
gat so it's not that we always disagree
others disagreed with us the Mideast is
very difficult but it seemed to me just
as an observer that
you know before you'd call somebody to
America you'd have some notion what the
end result might be maybe it's better
just to get together and sit down and
talk maybe that was the purpose and I
know talks of Canadian started again
today but again it's almost like an
ad-hoc foreign policy it's ad hoc it's
sort of well get up in the morning read
the papers and what country's in trouble
we'll have a meeting to me that's not
the strategy that I think the people
expect from America I think we have lost
credibility and I say this very honestly
without any partisanship we've lost
credibility around the world our allies
know they're not certain we're gonna do
what our reaction what a response is
going to be nobody suggested sending
troops to Iraq if that was the hint
there from the president but I do think
that Saddam was saying is stronger and
he was and I do believe that he didn't
gain a great deal in the Mideast by
bringing three of the four leaders one
refused to come to Washington DC
we have a very consistent policy in the
Middle East it is to support the peace
process to support the security of
Israel and to support those who are
prepared to take risks for peace it is a
very difficult environment the feelings
are very strong there are extremists in
all parts of the Middle East who want to
kill that peace process
Prime Minister Rabine gave his life
because someone in his own country
literally hated him for trying to bring
peace I would like to have had a big
organized summit but those people were
killing each other
rapidly innocent Arab children innocent
Israeli people they were dying and there
is there so much trust is broken down in
the aftermath of the change of
government I felt that if I could just
get the parties together to say let's
stop the violence
start talking commit to the negotiations
that would be a plus now today the
Secretary of State is in the Middle East
and they started negotiations and all
those leaders promised me they would not
quit until they resolve the issues
between them and got the peace process
going forward again
well I've disappointed the president not
called for an unconditional end of the
violence mean it's been to me the
violence had stopped when these leaders
came to America the killing and the
tragedies had taken place and it's
unfortunate and it is a difficult area
no doubt about it shouldn't be
politicized in any way by the President
or by by his opponent and I don't intend
to politicize it I hope that they've
talked and I hope they reach some result
and that they're killing the land
mr. president in your acceptance speech
in Chicago you said the real choice in
this race is quote whether we build a
bridge to the future or a bridge to the
past about whether we believe our best
days are still out there or our best
days are behind us about whether we want
a country of people all working together
or one where you're on your own in quote
are you saying that you believe Senator
Dole is a man of the past
Leedy and if they're if elected
president he would lead the country
backwards well I'm saying that Senator
Dole said in his fine speech in San
Diego that he wanted to build a bridge
to the past and I think I know what he
meant by that he's troubled as I am by
some of the things that go on today but
I believe America is the greatest
country in human history because we have
maintained freedom and increasing
prosperity by relentlessly pushing the
barriers of knowledge the barriers of
the present always move moving into the
future that's why when I became
president I was determined to kind of
move beyond this old stale debate that
had gone on in Washington for too long
to get this country moving again and
that's why we've got a country with ten
and a half million more jobs and record
numbers of new businesses and rising
incomes and falling crime rates and
welfare roll rates while we're moving in
the right direction and I'm trying to
emphasize that what I want to do is to
continue to do that that's why my
balanced budget plan will still invest
and grow this economy that's why I want
a tax cut for education and child
rearing but it's got to be paid for
that's why I want to continue the work
we have done over partisan opposition to
work with communities to bring that
crime rate down until our streets are
all safe again these are my commitments
I am very oriented toward the future I
think this election has to be geared
toward the eye because best days are
still but we got my bridge oh you know
the president reminded me sometimes my
brother Kenny who's no longer alive but
Kenny was a great talker and he used to
tell me things that I knew were not
quite accurate so he always had a rule
/ 6 now maybe in your case maybe just 2
but 11 million new jobs and everything I
mean the president can't take credit for
everything that governors are doing
whether it's happening in New York City
when it comes to the murder rate and
then not be responsible for the bad
things that happen whether it's drug use
or something else in America and so it
seems to me that we can talk about what
we called Kenny the great exaggerator he
just like the exact make it sound a
little better men even feel better when
it comes to bridges
I want to bridge to the future I also
want to bridge to the truth we have to
tell the truth we've got people watching
tonight and listening night trying to
find the truth and the truth is there's
a lot wrong with America we need a
strong economic package we need a tax
cut we need to $500 child credit and
we'll have that soon mr. president
I do not for a moment think I'm entitled
to all the credit for the good things
that have happened in America but where
I have moved to work with the American
people that help them have the tools to
make the most of their own lives I think
I should get some credit for that I also
personally took responsibility tonight
when Senator Dole asked me about the
drug problem but you know I think my
ideas are better for the future senator
Dole voted against student loans against
head start against creating the
Department of Education if he gets
elected president we'll start the new
century without anyone in the cabinet of
the president representing education in
our children I personally don't think
that's the right kind of future for
America and I think we ought to take a
different tack senator Dole do you still
favor eliminating the Department of
Education yes I didn't a favor of one of
his own started I voted against it it
was a tribute after President Carter's
election again to the National Education
Association we sent a lot of delegates
to the Democratic convention who give
99.5% of their money Democrat Democrats
and the president and a lot of the
teachers send their kids to private
schools or better public schools so what
we want to do is call opportunity
scholarships now some say oh you're
Republican you can't be reaching out to
these people I've reached out to people
all my life I've worked on the food
stamp program proudly and the WIC
program and the school lunch program
with senators like George McGovern
Hubert Humphrey and others to name a few
of my Democratic friends
I'm not some extremists out here I care
about people I have my own little
foundationist raised about ten million
dollars for the disabled I don't
advertise it just did
haven't before and I try to do a lot of
things that I think might be helpful to
people well it seems to me that we ought
to take that money we can say from the
Department of Education putting in
opportunity scholarships and tell little
Landale Shakespeare out in Cleveland
Ohio and tell your mother and father
you're gonna get to go to school because
we're gonna match what the state puts up
and you're gonna get to go to the school
of your choice I don't fault the
president of the vice president for
sending their children to private
or better schools I applaud him for it I
don't criticize him but why shouldn't
everybody have that choice why shouldn't
low-income Americans and low
middle-income Americans I'm excited
about it it's going to be a big big
opportunity for a lot of people let me
say first of all I'm all for students
having more choices we've worked hard to
expand public school choice in my
balanced budget bill there's funds for
three thousand new schools created by
teachers and parents sometimes by
business people call charter schools
that have no rules they're free of
bureaucracy and can only stay in
existence if they perform and teach
children the ones that are out there
doing well what I'm against is Senator
doles planned to take money away from
children we never limited federal funds
and help have a private voucher that
ought to be local level but Senator Dole
has consistently opposed federal help to
education he voted against student loans
he voted against my improved student
loan plan he voted against the national
service bill against the headstart bill
he voted against our efforts in safe and
drug-free schools he has voted against
these programs he does not believe it
that's the issue 90% of our kids are out
there in those public schools and we
need to lift their standards and move
them forward with the programs like
those I've outlined in this campaign I
better correct the President on what
time it is but it's probably getting
late but I want to correct all these
things I voted against they were
probably part of some big package it had
a lot of pork in it or a lot of things
we shouldn't've aadmi party voted no
I've supported all the education program
supported Head Start I think we ought to
look at it so I don't know anybody after
to think that we've just been a voting
no no no let's give low-income parents
the same right that people of power and
prestige have in America and let them go
to better schools let's not let's help
let's turn to schools back to the
teachers and back to the parents and
take it away from the National Education
Association mr. president what's wrong
with school choice proposal I support
school choice I support school choice I
have advocated expansions of public
school choice alternatives and I said
the creation of 3,000 new schools that
we're going to help the states to
finance but if you're gonna have a
private voucher plan
to be determined by states and
localities where they're raising and
spending most of the money I simply
think it's wrong to take money away from
programs that are helping build basic
skills for kids 90% of them are in the
public schools to take money away from
programs that are helping fund the
School Lunch Program that are helping to
fund the other programs that are helping
our district schools to improve their
standards our schools are getting better
and our schools can be made to be even
better still with the right kind of
community leadership in partnership at
the school level I have been a strong
force for reform and Senator I wrote 490
that a few years ago when I supported a
teacher testing law in my home state
that I was pretty well lambasted by the
teachers association I just don't
believe we ought to be out there running
down teachers and attacking them the way
you did it's a Republican convention and
I think we ought to be lifting them up
and moving our children forward and let
me just say that budget you pass that I
vetoed would have cut 50 thousand kids
out of Head Start it would have
eliminated the AmeriCorps plan and it
would have cut back on student loans and
scholarships now it would have that's
the fact that's one of the big reasons
I've vetoed it we need to be doing more
in education not less
well the AmeriCorps program I must say
if that's one of your successes I
wouldn't speak about it too loudly it's
cost about twenty-seven thousand dollars
to pay people to volunteer we've got
four million young people volunteering
every year the number hasn't gone down
you pick out 20,000 whether they need
the money or not and they get paid for
volunteering I like young people I like
teachers I'm a product of public schools
you attended a private school for some
time in your life I like teachers but
let's you're not for school choice you
can't be for school choice because it's
that special interest money again when
you get 99 and 0.5% of the money we
don't what happen to the other 0.5%
we're looking for it somebody got it but
it all went to Democrats and this is
part of that liberal established one of
those liberal things that you just can't
do your school uniform
and curfews and you're opposed to
truancy now that's not reform mr.
president why can't land l Shakespeare
and plead with or pilar gonzalez in
Milwaukee give their children an
opportunity to go to a better school
some schools aren't safe some schools
aren't even safe and you your choice is
nothing let's give them real choice the
kind of choice you have and the kind of
choice and a lot of people have in
America if we want to stop crime and
teenage pregnancy let's start with
education first of all senator Dole
let's set the record straight I was able
for two years when I was in a very young
boy to go to a Catholic school but I
basically went to public schools all my
life and I've worked hard for a long
time to make them better and 90% of our
kids are there you it's amazing to me
you are all for having more
responsibility at the local level for
everything except schools where we don't
have very much money at the federal
level to spend on education we ought to
spend it helping the 90% of the kids
that we can help if the local school
district in Cleveland or anyplace else
wants to have a private school choice
plan like Milwaukee did let them have at
it I might say the results are highly
ambiguous but I want to get out there
and give a better education opportunity
to all of our children and that's why I
vetoed the budget that you pass with 30
billion dollars in education cuts it was
wrong yes when I planned for the futures
better senator dole at the Republican
convention you said the following and I
quote it is demeaning to the nation that
within the Clinton administration of
core of the elite who never grew up
never did anything real never sacrificed
never suffered and never learned should
have the power to fund with your
earnings their dubious and self-serving
schemes in quote clearly precisely and
what precisely did you have in mind
I had precisely in mind a lot of the
people who were in the White House and
other agencies who've never been had any
experience who came to Washington
without any
they're all very liberal of course they
wouldn't be in the administration and
their idea was that they knew what was
best for the American people now I feel
very strongly about a lot of things I
feel strongly about education I want to
help young people have an education just
as a higher damage the world of the GI
Bill of Rights we've had millions of
young men and women in subsequent wars
change the face of the nation because
the government helped with their
education now the reason they don't have
you know the great some president can't
support this is pretty obvious it's not
taking anything away from schools it's
new money it's not taken away from
anybody else except we'll downsize the
Department of Education but this is a
very liberal administration
this is administration gave you the big
tax cut this administration tried to
take over health care and impose a
governmental system this the
administration of what regulatory reform
is putting a lot of small businessman
and small business women out of business
this administration had fought the
balanced budget amendment and vetoed a
balanced budget and vetoed welfare
reform twice and the list goes on and on
and on that's what I had in mind I want
people in my administration and we'll
have people in my administration who
understand America
there won't be ten millionaires and
fourteen lawyers in the cabinet
there'll be people with experience and
people understand America and people
who've made it and know the Hard Knocks
in life when senator Dole made that
remark about all the elitist younger
leaders in the administration one of the
young men who works for me who grew up
in a house trailer looked at me and said
mr. president I know how you grew up who
is he talking about and you know this
liberal charge that's what their party
always drags out when they get in a
tight race sort of their golden oldie
you know it's a record they think they
can play that everybody loves to hear
and I just don't think that dog will
hunt this time the American people
should make up their own mind here's the
record we cut the deficit four years in
a row for the first time since before
the Civil War
I mean before
or two and then maybe before the Civil
War - we've got ten and a half million
new jobs we've got record numbers of
those new small businesses we made every
one of them eligible for a tax cut we've
got declining crime rates two million
fewer people on welfare rolls before
welfare reform pass and a 50% increase
in child support and a crime bill with
60 death penalties a hundred thousand
police and the assault weapons ban the
American people can make up their mind
about whether that's a liberal record or
a record that's good for America
they're both conservative you put
whatever label are y'all who you want on
it I think it's pretty liberal I'll put
that label on it you take a look at all
the programs you've advocated mr.
president thank goodness we had a
Republican Congress there the first
thing you did you came into office was
sent up a stimulus package so we got a
little poor could want to scatter around
America sixteen billion dollars and even
some in your own party couldn't buy that
I'm ever talking by the telephone I'm
not even certain you were too excited
about I want to never repeat what I've
talked to the president Bob but any
event we saved the taxpayers 16 billion
dollars and then came some other
programs and then came health care and
then came the tax increase a lot of
these things just stopped in 1994
because then the Congress changed I
think we've done a good job mr.
president if you're not a liberal
describe your political philosophy I
believe that the purpose of politics is
to give people the tools to make the
most of their own lives to reinforce the
values of opportunity and responsibility
and to build a sense of community so
we're all working together I don't
believe in discrimination I believe you
can protect the environment and grow the
economy I believe that we have to do
these things with the government that's
smaller and less bureaucratic but do we
have to do them nonetheless it's
inconvenient for senator Dole but the
truth is I've reduced the size of
government more than my Republican
predecessors and I did stop them I admit
that and I sure stopped their budget
their budget cut enforcement for the
Environmental Protection Agency by a
third it cut funds to clean out toxic
waste dumps with ten
of our kids still living within four
miles of a toxic-waste now by a third it
ended the principle of the polluter
should pay for those toxic waste dumps
unless it was very recent their budget
weakened our support for education
thirty billion dollars even cut funds
for scholarships in college loans their
budget cut two hundred and seventy
billion dollars in Medicare and finally
their budget withdrew the National
guarantee of health care to poor
children families with children with
handicaps the elderly in nursing homes
for pregnant women it was wrong for the
country and calling it conservative
won't make it right it was a bad
decision for America and would have been
bad for our future if I hadn't stopped
well the president can define himself in
any way and watch but I think we have to
look at the record get back to the time
he was what Texas director for George
McGovern and George McGovern is a friend
of mine so I don't mean but he was a
liberal proud liberal I just finished
reading a book I think it's called was
it the demise of the Democratic Party by
Ronald Carr - or something talking about
all the liberal influences and the
administration whether it's organized
labor or whether it's a Hollywood elite
or whether some of the media elite or
whether it's the labor unions or
whatever and so I think you take a look
at it but the bottom line is this I
think the American people thought it
recite all these bills and all these
things they want to know what's gonna
happen to them they've all got a lot of
anxieties out there did anybody complain
when you raise taxes anybody go out and
ask the people how you gonna pay the
extra money that's why we want an
economic package we want the government
to pinch their pennies for a change set
of people pinching their pennies that's
what our message is to people watching I
know all this back and forth you voted
this way you voted that way we want a
better America as we go into the next
century the way to get a better America
is to balance the budget and protect
Medicare Medicaid education in the
environment to give a targeted tax cut
and let me talk about the education tax
cut to let people have a ten thousand
dollar deduction for the cost of college
tuition in any year any kind of college
tuition to give families a tax credit a
dollar-for-dollar reduction in their
taxes for the cost of a typical
community college so we can open that to
everybody and then to let people save in
an IRA and withdraw from it without a
tax penalty for education home buying or
medical expenses that's the right way to
go into the 21st century balance the
budget and cut taxes not ballooned with
this five hundred and fifty billion
dollar tax scheme senator Dole we talked
mostly now about differences between the
two of you that relate to policy issues
and that's
anything but there are also significant
differences in the more personal area
that are relevant to this election let
me say first on the president's promise
for another tax cut and I've told people
as I traveled on called you've got the
tax hoodie promised last time vote for
him in 96 and not many hands go up so
the question would you buy used election
promise from my opponent the people want
economic reform they're having a hard
time making ends meet
you got one parent working for the
government the other parent working for
the family and this is important
business this about getting the economy
moving again this is about American jobs
and opportunities it's about the
government as I said before pinching its
pennies for change instead of the poor
taxpayer when they raise your taxes
nobody runs around asking people where
you going to get the extra money I think
the government can do better
are there personal differences that are
relevant to this now my blood pressure
is lower and my weight my cholesterol
but I will not make health an issue in
this campaign
I think he's he's a bit taller than I am
but I think they're first some
differences I mean I don't know I don't
like to get into personal matter as far
as I'm concerned this is a campaign
about issues it's about my vision for
America and about his liberal vision for
America not about personal things and I
think his liberal vision is a thing of
the past I know he wants to disown it
how I wouldn't want to be a liberal
either mr. president you're stuck with
it because that's that's your record
your record in Arkansas the biggest tax
increase in history biggest crime
increase in history biggest drug
increase in history in Arkansas mr.
president well just for the record when
I was a government we had the lowest
second lowest tax burden of any state in
the country the highest the abro
straight of any state when I ran for
president and were widely recognized for
a lot of other advances but the
important thing is what are we gonna do
now I think a targeted tax cut is better
for our future targeted to education and
child rearing with the rest of the
education planet hooking up all of our
classrooms to the internet with a year
2000 making sure we've got an army of
reading volunteers trained people to
teach with parents and teachers so that
our eight year olds can learn to read
investing in our environment cleaning up
two-thirds of the worst toxic waste
dumps those plans are better than this
five hundred and fifty billion dollar
tax scheme not remember folks even
senator doles campaign co-chair senator
D'Amato says he's got to cut Medicare to
pay for this everybody has looked at it
500 economists seven Nobel Prize winners
say it's bad for the economy it's gonna
blow a hole of the deficit raise taxes
on nine million people and require
bigger cuts than the one I vetoed our
plan is better it'll take us into the
future with a growing economy and
healthier families well I'm really
encouraged Toby renewed friendship with
album
and I know you're crazy
you didn't have tax cuts in your budget
mr. president first two years your
president was until we had a Republican
Congress even thought about so he talked
about tax cuts and getting back to
personal differences I don't you know I
think it Jim if you're a little more
specific but I think the president could
clarify one thing tonight and that's the
question of pardons I know you talked
about it on the gym the gym layer on a
PBS show and I've never discussed
whitewater as I've told you personally
I'm not discussing whitewater now but I
am discussing a power the president has
to grant pardons and hopefully in the
next segment you could lay that to rest
mr. president well first of all you know
he made that remark about Senator
D'Amato he's arranged for me to spend a
lot more time with Senator D'Amato in
the last couple of years and so uh I'm
more familiar with his comments than I
used to be
let me say what I said already about
this pardon issue this is an issue they
brought up it's under there's been no
consideration of it no discussion of it
I'll tell you this I will not give
anyone special treatment and I will
strictly adhere to the law and that is
what every president has done as far as
I know in the past but what every other
presence had done this is something I
take seriously and that's my position
but it seemed to me the president
shouldn't have any comment at all
particular where someone we've had
dealeth business dealings I mean you may
be sending a signal I don't know I'm not
questioning anybody but as a proud
United States when somebody asks you
about pardon do you say no comment
period and I think he made a mistake and
I think when you make a mistake you say
I made a mistake but apparently his
position hasn't changed so if there are
other specific areas but beyond that
I've I haven't gotten into any of these
things as the president knows we've had
that discussion and I again I know son
D'Amato
I think may I had a hearing or do a lot
of whitewater I can't remember but
he's not my general chairman he's a
friend of mine and so is Senator Kennedy
a friend of yours and he'd been I
remember one day on the floor I said now
gentlemen let me tax your memories and
Kennedy jumped up and said why haven't
we thought of that before
[Music]
just frozen 30 seconds no comment
[Applause]
what's the subject matter
senator Dole if you could single out one
thing that you would like for the voters
to have in their mind about President
Clinton on a policy matter or a personal
matter what would it be something to
know about him understand it and
appreciate it
see if I say anything it's going to be
misconstrued I don't think there's even
a race between the tis about our vision
for America
I have no like presents when personal
I'm addressing multi meaning mr.
president I said in 1992 he didn't
extend that courtesy of President Bush
but I respect the presidency I've served
under a number of presidents they all
have their strengths and all have their
weaknesses so I'd rather talk about my
strengths I think I have my strengths I
think the best thing doing for Bob Dole
Bob Dole keeps his word it's a question
between trust and fear and I would say I
think mr. president about all you've got
going in his campaign is fear you're
spending millions and millions of
dollars in negative ads frightening
senior citizens I know this to be a fact
because I had one tell me last week
senator don't cut my Medicare I'm trying
to save your Medicare just as ice'
rescued Social Security with a
bipartisan Commission I had relatives on
Medicare I used to sign welfare checks
for my grandparents I know all about
poverty and all about me and all about
taking care of people and that's been my
career in the United States Senate and
I'll keep my word on the economic
package if I couldn't cut taxes and
balance the budget at the same time I
wouldn't look you in the eye tonight in
your living room wherever you may be and
say that this is good for America people
will tell you is third with Bob Dole
with greer disagree he kept his word
that's what this race is all about
I'd like the American people to know
that I have worked very hard to be on
their side and to move this country
forward and we're better off than we
were four years ago but the most
important thing is my plan for the 21st
century is a better plan
a targeted tax cut a real commitment to
educational reform a deep commitment to
making welfare reform work with
incentives to the private sector to move
people from welfare to work now we have
to create those jobs now that we're
requiring people to go to work a
commitment to continuing step-by-step
health the care reform with the next
step helping people who are between jobs
to access health care and not lose it
just because they're out of work for a
while a commitment to grow the economy
while protecting the environment that's
what I'd like them to know about me that
I've gotten up every day and worked for
the American people and worked so that
their children could have their dreams
come true and I believe we've got the
results to show we're on the right track
the most important thing is I believe
we've got the right ideas for the future
and I like Senator Dole I like Senator
Dole you could probably tell we like
each other
we just see the world in different ways
and you folks out there gonna have to
choose who you think is right well I'd
say that you know the first almost bill
in the Senate was a Dahlberg bill part
of the Bergdahl bail I can't remember
who was controlled then I remember
working with senator Ribicoff from
Connecticut on the hospice program now
2,500 hospices as I said I remember I've
worked all my life while I was in the
Congress I left on June 11 because I'm
one of the American people to know as I
was willing to give up something
President Clinton ran for governor 1990s
that is gonna fill out his term and he
didn't he's president so I guess it's a
little better deal but I wanted the
American people know but I was willing
to give up something wasn't just getting
more power and more power so I rolled
the dice I put my career on the line
because I really believed the future of
America is on the line we can give you
all these numbers they don't mean a
thing if you're out of work
you have nothing to eat you can't have
medical care or just holding your crack
baby in your arms right now I think what
what do you do next
you know America's best days are ahead
of us I've seen the tough times I know
they can be better and I'll lead America
to a brighter future
mr. president what do you say to Senator
doles point that that this election is
about keeping once word let's look at
that when I ran for president cut the
deficit in half and fourth by sixty I
said with our economic news eight
we have nothing new we're number photos
again but new small businesses I said
pass a crime bill it would put a hundred
thousand police on the street ban
assault weapons and deal with the
problems that ought to be dealt with
with capital punishment including
capital punishment for drug kingpins and
we did that I said we would change the
way welfare works and even before the
bill passed we'd move nearly two million
people from welfare to work working with
states and communities I said we get
tougher on child support and child
support enforcement sup fifty percent
said tax room it'll class Americans the
deficit was bigger he's gonna dig in I
think they're better off all of us are
that we got those interest rates down in
the deficit then the Republicans talked
about it but we're the first
administration in anybody's lifetime
looking at this program to bring that
deficit down four years in a row we
still gave tax cuts to 15 million
working Americans and now I've got a
plan that's been out there for two years
it could have been passed already but
instead the Republicans shut the
government down to try to force their
budget and their plan on me and I
couldn't take that but we'll get the
rest of that tax relief and so I think
when you can look at those results you
know that the plan I've laid out for the
future has a very good chance of being
enacted if you'll give me a chance to
build that bridge to the 21st century
so
well there he goes again I mean it's a
line that's been used before but
exaggerating all the things that he did
he didn't do all these things let's take
all these for depth you know years in a
row he came in with a high growth rate
the 1990 budget agreement with some you
know didn't like had some very tough
cost controls put a lot of pressure on
Congress the S&L crisis was over they're
starting to sell assets all that money
was coming in and he cut defense an
extra 60 billion dollars do a lot of
people out of work he talked about a
smaller government they're actually more
people in government except for people
in defense related jobs they're gone
the government's bigger than was when
President Kennedy was around noise says
it's not in addition to Republican
Congress cut fifty three billion dollars
so let's just you know let's give credit
where credit is due governor Engler
Michigan cut taxes 21 times create a lot
of new jobs so to governor Thompson so
do governor Roland a lot of people out
to deserve credit mr. president when I'm
president I know states we're gonna have
a Governor's Council and we're gonna
work directly with the governor's
Republicans and Democrats to get power
back to the people in back to the states
I think a lot of people deserve credit
and I've tried to give it to them but I
believe that my plan is better than
Senator doles ill-advised five hundred
and fifty billion dollar scheme which
I'll say again will blow a hole in the
deficit our plan will balance the budget
and grow the economy preserve the
environment and invest in education we
have the right approach for the future
and look at the result it is not
midnight in America senator we are
better off than we were four years ago
all right that's the last question the
last answer what's going on to the
closing statements mr. president your
first two minutes
well first young let me thank you and
thank you senator Dole and thank you
ladies and gentlemen all of you
listening tonight for the chance you've
given us to appear
I want to say in the beginning that I am
profoundly grateful for the chance that
you have given me to serve as president
for the last four years I never could
have dreamed that anything like this
would come my way in life and I've done
my best to be faithful to the charge
you've given me I'm proud of the fact
that America is stronger and more
prosperous and more secure than we were
four years ago
I'm glad we're going in the right
direction and I've done my best tonight
to lay out my plans for going forward to
an even better future in the next
century I'd like to leave you with the
thought that the things I do as
president are basically driven by the
people whose lives I have seen affected
by what does or doesn't happen in this
country the auto worker in Toledo who
was unemployed when I was elected and
now has a great job because we're number
one in auto production again all the
people I've met who used to be on
welfare who are now working and raising
their children and I think what others
could do for our country and for
themselves if we did the welfare reform
thing in the proper way I think of the
man who grabbed me by the shoulder once
with tears in his eyes and said his
daughter was dying of cancer and he
thanked me for giving him a chance to
spend some time with her without losing
his job because of the Family and
Medical Leave Act I think of all the
people that I grew up with and went to
school with and I stay in touch with and
who never let me forget how what we do
in Washington affects all of you out
there in America folks we can build that
bridge to the 21st century big enough
and strong enough for all of us to walk
across and I hope that you will help me
build it senator Dole your closing
statement sir
thank you Jim Thank You mr. president
thank everyone for watching and
listening I want to dress my remarks to
the young people of America
because they're the ones are gonna spend
most of their life in the 21st century
they're the ones who had the challenges
and they're people out there making
predictions that it's not going to be
the same you're not going to have the
opportunity is gonna be more deficits
more drugs more crime and less
confidence in the American people and
that's what you're faced with the
parents are faced with and the
grandparents are faced with it's
important it's their future and I would
say to those I know there are more young
people experimenting with drugs today
than ever before
drug use has gone up and if you care
about the future of America if you care
about your future just don't do it and I
know that I'm someone older than you
but I've had my anxious moments in my
life I've learned to feed myself from
the walk and address and I'm standing
here as proof that in America the
possibilities are unlimited I Know Who I
am and I know where I'm from and I know
where I want to take America we are the
greatest country on the face of the
earth we do more good things for more
people in our communities our
neighborhoods than anywhere that I know
of this is important business this
election is important I ask for your
support
I ask for your help if you really want
to get involved just tap into my
homepage WWE champ 9600 RG thank you god
bless america
[Applause]
I mean
[Music]
[Applause]
let me just fill them out
[Music]
[Applause]
it's the candidates the tonight's first
presidential debate in Hartford
Connecticut you had a chance to see the
debate we're gonna open our phone lines
to hear what she can't thought about
what you saw we have lines set aside for
those of you supporting President
Clinton those of you supporting senator
Dole and those who are undecided or
supporting a third candidate in this
presidential election please do use
those phone lines and we're gonna ask
you to keep your comments brief we'd
like to hear from you what you learned
or what you thought was the most
significant moment of tonight's first
presidential debate first is Fort
Lauderdale Florida hello you're on the
air go ahead yes
I thought the debates were wonderful I
want to thank c-span and I thought mr.
Clinton said all the things that we need
to hear and I hope he is reelected
Alexander city Alabama
go ahead call her yes first of all I say
I appreciate c-span cover to this I
think it's excellent
but I think there was three key points
that the dole said that the American
people who seem to remember and they're
number one was the trust duty trust and
I think that people realize that soul is
that person number two is when he said
that uh they didn't ask the American
people about how we're going to afford
the tax increase the Clinton takes and
number three was his point to Clinton
about what he promised last time about
the reducing the taxes but she didn't do
and I think people Americans won't
realize it Thank You San Jose California
what did you think hi I believe there
are many conflicting statements that
were given by each side this evening in
their representations of what would be
their understanding of statistics I
think it's very interesting from both
sides however I have
big grave questions and I do believe it
boils down to a question of whose side
will one trust which the set of
statistics is the set that you're going
to believe therefore how do you make
that decision and as a court reporter in
the state of California I've heard a
judge say many times getting an
instruction to a jury that if a witness
gives inconsistent or conflicting
stories that his testimony is to be
disbelieved Clinton a few weeks ago when
he was asked about his marijuana
experiences said he'd do it again
tonight he stated he hates drugs to me
that was just one of the many many
examples of a lack of integrity and
it'll cited speaking Thank You caller
appreciate your comments from San Jose
California the candidates both had
rallies in Hartford and they planned to
overnight in the city before continuing
their campaigns tomorrow next is a call
from Romulus Michigan yes my name is
Agnes Renton
I am from Romulus Michigan I'm a united
auto worker this is the best four years
I spent 23 years in the auto industry my
parents were both senior citizens I
worry about each and every one of the
senior citizens and I believe Bill
Clinton does too and anyone who thinks
that Bob Dole will make a good president
better think twice thank you next call
comes from Miami Florida Miami go ahead
please hello my name is Gail burns I'm
from Miami Florida I'm a small business
owner one of the things that most
attracted me about Bob Dole and I am a
Dole supporter was if he brought up
whitewater I think that that's something
that's beyond party to deal with when
the media wants to find their deep
throat they will find it secondly
I am very hurt by the issue of the
litigation cap as a small business owner
this affects us in insurance in so many
ways that we have had to close down
three businesses in the past year and if
you have a corporation that's not a big
deal
but when you are close to the people
it's a big deal and it's mainly because
of we can't afford an insurance after
Hurricane Andrew because of the
litigation that came through down here
and I wish Bob all the best it was
originally a native Kansan but I think
they both did well I think Clinton did
well and dole dilled well but I think
Bob I think mr. leer I think he did a
very good job and he may come up with
some very good formats for the next
debate thank you very much for your
comments you're looking at some scenes
from earlier tonight as the candidates
thanked their supporters in the crowd at
the Bushnell Theater in Hartford the
next debate is just three days away vice
president vice presidential contestants
Al Gore and Jack Kemp meet on Wednesday
at 9:00 p.m. Eastern time at the mojave
theater in st. Petersburg Florida our
coverage of that second in the series
begins at 7:00 p.m.
next is the call from Chicago I like to
say hello and congratulate you on your
fair coverage of the of the campaigns as
well as the debates just a quick point
I'm a CPA here and she